---
layout: default
title: "Publications"
---

## Manuscripts from members of the ZIBRA consortium

### <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/03/27/105171">Epidemic establishment and cryptic transmission of Zika virus in Brazil and the Americas</a>

_Faria N, and the ZiBRA Project Consortium_

  - 1st version posted: February 2, 2017
  - 2nd version posted: March 27 2017
  - Original report on <a href="http://virological.org/t/phylogeography-of-zika-virus-preliminary-analysis-of-36-zibra-genomes-from-brazil/374">Virological.org</a>: October 5, 2016

Zika virus (ZIKV) transmission in the Americas was first confirmed in May 2015 in Northeast Brazil1. Brazil has the highest number of reported ZIKV cases worldwide (>200,000 by 24 Dec 2016) as well as the greatest number of cases associated with microcephaly and other birth defects (2,366 confirmed cases by 31 Dec 2016). Following the initial detection of ZIKV in Brazil, 47 countries and territories in the Americas have reported local ZIKV transmission, with 24 of these reporting ZIKV-associated severe disease. Yet the origin and epidemic history of ZIKV in Brazil and the Americas remain poorly understood, despite the value of such information for interpreting past and future trends in reported microcephaly. To address this we generated 54 complete or partial ZIKV genomes, mostly from Brazil, and report data generated by the ZiBRA project - a mobile genomics lab that travelled across Northeast (NE) Brazil in 2016. One sequence represents the earliest confirmed ZIKV infection in Brazil. Joint analyses of viral genomes with ecological and epidemiological data estimate that ZIKV epidemic was present in NE Brazil by March 2014 and likely disseminated from there, both nationally and internationally, before the first detection of ZIKV in the Americas. Estimated dates of the international spread of ZIKV from Brazil indicate the duration of pre-detection cryptic transmission in recipient regions. NE Brazil's role in the establishment of ZIKV in the Americas is further supported by geographic analysis of ZIKV transmission potential and by estimates of the virus' basic reproduction number.

## Supporting data

Please refer to the supporting <a href="https://github.com/zibraproject/zibra-data">Github data repository</a> for alignments, trees and BEAST XML files used for analysis.

### <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/02/03/104794">Multiple introductions of Zika virus into the United States revealed through genomic epidemiology</a>

Grubaugh et al.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is causing an unprecedented epidemic linked to severe congenital syndromes1,2. In July 2016, mosquito-borne ZIKV transmission was first reported in the continental United States and since then, hundreds of locally-acquired infections have been reported in Florida3. To gain insights into the timing, source, and likely route(s) of introduction of ZIKV into the continental United States, we tracked the virus from its first detection in Miami, Florida by direct sequencing of ZIKV genomes from infected patients and Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. We show that at least four distinct ZIKV introductions contributed to the outbreak in Florida and that local transmission likely started in the spring of 2016 - several months before its initial detection. By analyzing surveillance and genetic data, we discovered that ZIKV moved among transmission zones in Miami. Our analyses show that most introductions are phylogenetically linked to the Caribbean, a finding corroborated by the high incidence rates and traffic volumes from the region into the Miami area. By comparing mosquito abundance and travel flows, we describe the areas of southern Florida that are especially vulnerable to ZIKV introductions. Our study provides a deeper understanding of how ZIKV initiates and sustains transmission in new regions.

### <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/01/09/098913">Multiplex PCR method for MinION and Illumina sequencing of Zika and other virus genomes directly from clinical samples</a>

Quick J, and the ZiBRA Project Consortium.

  - <a href="https://github.com/zibraproject/zibraproject.github.io/blob/master/data/amplicon_sequencing_protocol_v2.pdf">1st protocol: July 15, 2016</a>
  - <a href="https://github.com/zibraproject/zibraproject.github.io/blob/master/data/amplicon_sequencing_protocol_v3.pdf">2nd protocol: September 29, 2016</a>
  - <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/01/09/098913">Preprint version: Jan 9, 2017</a>

Genome sequencing has become a powerful tool for studying emerging infectious diseases; however, genome sequencing directly from clinical samples without isolation remains challenging for viruses such as Zika, where metagenomic sequencing methods may generate insufficient numbers of viral reads. Here we present a protocol for generating coding-sequence complete genomes comprising an online primer design tool, a novel multiplex PCR enrichment protocol, optimised library preparation methods for the portable MinION sequencer (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) and the Illumina range of instruments, and a bioinformatics pipeline for generating consensus sequences. The MinION protocol does not require an internet connection for analysis, making it suitable for field applications with limited connectivity. Our method relies on multiplex PCR for targeted enrichment of viral genomes from samples containing as few as 50 genome copies per reaction. Viral consensus sequences can be achieved starting with clinical samples in 1-2 days following a simple laboratory workflow. This method has been successfully used by several groups studying Zika virus evolution and is facilitating an understanding of the spread of the virus in the Americas.

### <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/01/20/101972">Epidemiological and ecological determinants of Zika virus transmission in an urban setting.</a>

Jose Lourenco, Maricela Maia de Lima, Nuno Rodrigues Faria, Andrew Walker, Mortiz UG Kraemer, Christian J Villabona-Arenas, Ben Lambert, Erenilde Marques de Cerqueira, Oliver G Pybus, Luiz CJ Alcantara, Mario Recker

Zika has emerged as a global public health concern. Although its rapid geographic expansion can be attributed to the success of its Aedes mosquito vectors, local epidemiological drivers are still poorly understood. The city of Feira de Santana played a pivotal role in the early phases of the Chikungunya and Zika epidemics in Brazil. Here, using a climate-driven transmission model, we show that low Zika observation rates and a high vectorial capacity in this region were responsible for a high attack rate during the 2015 outbreak and the subsequent decline in cases in 2016, when the epidemic was peaking in the rest of the country. Our projections indicate that the balance between the loss of herd-immunity and the frequency of viral re-importation will dictate the transmission potential of Zika in this region in the near future. Sporadic outbreaks are expected but unlikely to be detected under current surveillance systems.


### <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5038429/">Discovery of a persistent Zika virus lineage in Bahia, Brazil</a>

   - <a href="http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/04/24/049916">Preprint in bioRxiv</a>, 24th April 2016
   - <a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5038429/">Published in Emerging Infectious Diseases</a>: October 2016

This study from ZiBRA consortium members Nuno Faria and Oli Pybus show that samples from Bahia in Brazil, the area with the largest number of cases of microencephaly form a distinct clade and are closely related. Notably this paper demonstrates Zika genome recovery from clinical samples using bait probes and sequencing on Illumina. Whole genome recovery is tricky due to high Ct values.

### <a href="http://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/2016/03/23/science.aaf5036">Zika virus in the Americas: Early epidemiological and genetic findings</A>

_Science_, 24th March 2016

From ZiBRA consortium members Nuno Faria, Marcio Nunes and Oliver Pybus, this paper is the first to provide phylogenetic reconstructions of Brazilian strains of Zika, and to attempt to find a genetic basis for microcephaly in this lineage.




